


Annex II Referred to in Chapter 2

Rules of Origin
 
Annex II Referred to in Chapter 2

Rules of origin


Table of Contents

Section 1	General Provisions Article I	Definitions

Section 2	Concept of "Originating Products" Article II	Originating Products
Article III	Wholly Obtained Products
Article IV	Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products Article V	Accumulation of Origin
Article VI	Tolerance
Article VII	Non-Qualifying Operations Article VIII	Unit of Qualification
Article IX	Unassembled or Disassembled Product Article X	Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools Article XI	Neutral Elements
Article XII	Accounting Segregation

Section 3	Territorial Requirements Article XIII	Principle of Territoriality Article XIV	Consignment Criteria

Section 4	Certification of Origin Article XV	Proof of Origin
Article XVI	Certificate of Origin Article XVII	Certificate of Origin Issued
Retrospectively
Article XVIII	Issuance of a Duplicate Certificate of Origin
Article XIX	Origin Declaration
Article XX	Validity of Proof of Origin
Article XXI	Claim for Preferential Tariff Treatment Article XXII	Supporting Documents
Article XXIII	Preservation of Documents and Records
 
Section 5	Arrangements for Administrative Cooperation
Article XXIV	Notifications
Article XXV	Verification of Proofs of Origin Article XXVI	Confidentiality
Article XXVII	Penalties and Measures against Fraudulent Act
Article XXVIII Operational Procedures Article XXIX	Miscellaneous

Section 6	Final Provisions
Article XXX	Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation
Article XXXI	Transitional Provisions for Products in Transit or Storage

Appendices
Appendix 1	Product Specific Rules
Appendix 2	Specimen of Certificate of Origin Appendix 3	Text of the Origin Declaration
 
Section 1 General Provisions


Article I Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex,

(a)	“chapter,” “heading” and “subheading” of the Harmonized System respectively means a chapter (the first two-digit code in tariff classification number), a heading (the first four-digit code in tariff classification number) and a subheading (the six- digit code in tariff classification number) of the Harmonized System;

(b)	“competent governmental authority” means the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party, is responsible for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin or for the designation of certification entities or bodies, for the authorisation of approved exporters referred to in Article XIX of this Annex and for the verification of proofs of origin referred to in Article XXV of this Annex. In the case of Japan, it shall be the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, and in the case of Switzerland, the Federal Customs Administration;

(c)	“customs authority” means the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party or non- Party, is responsible for the administration and enforcement of customs laws and regulations of the Party or the non-Party. In the case of Japan, it shall be the Ministry of Finance, and in the case of Switzerland, the Federal Customs Administration;

(d)	“exporter” means a person located in the customs territory of an exporting Party who exports products from the customs territory of the exporting Party;
 
(e)	“ex-works price” means the price paid for the product ex-works to the producer located in the customs territory of a Party in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided that the price includes the value of all the materials used, wage and any other cost, and profit minus any internal taxes returned or repaid when the product obtained is exported;

(f)	“factory ships of the Party” or “vessels of the Party” respectively means factory ships or vessels:

(i)	which are registered in the customs territory of the Party;

(ii)	which sail under the flag of the Party;

(iii)	which are owned to an extent of at least 50 per cent by nationals of the Parties, or by a juridical person with its head office in the customs territory of either Party, of which the representatives, chairman of the board of directors, and the majority of the members of such board are nationals of the Parties, and of which at least 50 per cent of the equity interest is owned by nationals or juridical persons of the Parties;

(iv)	of which the master and officers are all nationals of the Parties; and

(v)	of which at least 75 per cent of the crew are nationals of the Parties;
 
(g)	“generally accepted accounting principles” means the recognised consensus or substantial authoritative support within the customs territory of a Party at a particular time as to which economic resources and obligations should be recorded as assets and liabilities, which changes in assets and liabilities should be recorded, how the assets and liabilities and changes in them should be measured, what information should be disclosed and how it should be disclosed, and which financial statements should be prepared. These standards may be broad guidelines of general application or detailed practices and procedures;

(h)	“importer” means a person who imports products into the customs territory of the importing Party;

(i)	“material” means a product that is used in the production of another product;

(j)	“non-originating material” means a material which does not qualify as an originating product under this Annex;

(k)	“preferential tariff treatment“ means the rate of customs duties applicable to originating products of a Party in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 15; and

(l)	“production” means a method of obtaining products including manufacturing, assembling, processing, raising, growing, breeding, mining, extracting, harvesting, fishing, trapping, gathering, collecting, hunting and capturing.
 
Section 2
Concept of “Originating Products”


Article II Originating Products

For the purposes of this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating products of a Party:

(a)	products wholly obtained in the customs territory of the Party, as defined in Article III of this Annex;

(b)	products obtained in the customs territory of the Party using non-originating materials, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in the customs territory of the Party within the meaning of Article IV of this Annex; and

(c)	products obtained in the customs territory of the Party exclusively from materials that qualify as originating products of the Party pursuant to this Annex.


Article  III Wholly Obtained Products

For the purposes of subparagraph (a) of Article II of this Annex, the following shall be considered as wholly obtained in the customs territory of a Party:

(a)	live animals born and raised in the customs territory of the Party;

(b)	animals obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering or capturing in the customs territory of the Party;

(c)	products obtained from live animals in the customs territory of the Party;
 
(d)	plants or plant products harvested, picked or gathered in the customs territory of the Party;

(e)	minerals and other naturally occurring substances, which are not included in subparagraphs (a) to (d), extracted or taken in the customs territory of the Party;

(f)	products of sea-fishing and other products taken by vessels of the Party from the sea outside the territorial seas of the Parties;

(g)	products produced on board factory ships of the Party, outside the territorial seas of the Parties, from the products referred to in subparagraph (f);

(h)	products taken from the sea-bed or subsoil thereof outside the territorial sea of the Party, provided that the Party has rights to exploit such sea-bed or subsoil under the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982;

(i)	articles collected in the customs territory of the Party which can no longer perform their original purpose in the customs territory of the Party nor are capable of being restored or repaired and which are fit only for disposal or for the recovery of parts or raw materials;

(j)	scrap and waste derived from manufacturing or processing operations or from consumption in the customs territory of the Party and which are fit only for disposal or for the recovery of raw materials;

(k)	parts or raw materials recovered in the customs territory of the Party from articles which can no longer perform their original purpose nor are capable of being restored or repaired; and
 
(l)	products obtained in the customs territory of the Party exclusively from products referred to in subparagraphs (a) to (k).


Article IV
Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products

1.	For the purposes of subparagraph (b) of Article II of this Annex, a product obtained using non-originating materials shall be considered as an originating product of a Party, if:

(a)	the value of non-originating materials used in the production of the product does not exceed 60 per cent of the ex-works price of the product; or

(b)	all non-originating materials used in the production of the product have undergone in the customs territory of the Party, a change in tariff classification at the level of the first four-digit code of the Harmonized System.

2.	Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a product of which the tariff classification number of the Harmonized System is listed in Appendix 1 to this Annex shall be considered as an originating product of a Party if it satisfies the product specific rules set out therein.

3.	For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the operations provided for in Article VII of this Annex shall be considered as insufficient.

4.	For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the value of non- originating materials used in the production of the product in the customs territory of a Party:

(a)	shall be determined in accordance with the Agreement on Customs Valuation and shall include freight, insurance and, where appropriate, packing and all other costs incurred in transporting the non- originating materials to the importation port in the customs territory of the Party where the producer of the product is located; or
 
(b)	if such value is unknown and cannot be ascertained, shall be the first ascertainable price paid for the non-originating materials in the customs territory of the Party, but may exclude all costs incurred in that customs territory in transporting the non-originating materials from the warehouse of the supplier of that material to the place where the producer is located such as freight, insurance and packing costs as well as any other known and ascertainable cost incurred in that customs territory.

5.	For the purposes of subparagraph 4(a), in determining the value of non-originating materials, the Agreement on Customs Valuation shall apply mutatis mutandis to domestic acquisition of the non-originating materials including domestic transactions.

6.	For the purposes of calculating the value of non- originating materials used in the production of a product in determining whether the product qualifies as an originating product of a Party, the value of non-originating materials of the product shall not include the value of non-originating materials used in the production of materials qualified as originating products of the Party which are used in the production of the product.

7.	For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the production carried out at different stages by one or more producers within the customs territory of a Party may be taken into account.

8.	For the purposes of this Article, “Harmonized System” is that on which the product specific rules set out in Appendix 1 to this Annex are based.
 
Article V Accumulation of Origin

1.	Notwithstanding Article II of this Annex, an originating product of a Party which is used as a material in the production of a product in the customs territory of the other Party may be considered as an originating product of that other Party.

2.	Originating products of a Party which are exported from the customs territory of one Party to the customs territory of the other Party shall retain qualification as originating products if:

(a)	such originating products are exported in the same condition as they were when they were imported into the customs territory of the exporting Party; or

(b)	such originating products have not undergone in the customs territory of the exporting Party working or processing beyond the operations referred to in Article VII of this Annex.


Article VI Tolerance

1.	Except as otherwise provided for in Appendix 1 to this Annex, a product obtained using non-originating materials that have not undergone the required change in tariff classification shall be considered as an originating product of a Party if:

(a)	for a product classified under chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized System, the value of all non- originating materials used in its production that have not undergone the required change in tariff classification does not exceed seven per cent of the ex-works price of the product;
 
(b)	for a product classified under chapters 25 to 49 or
64 to 97 of the Harmonized System, the value of all non-originating materials used in its production that have not undergone the required change in tariff classification does not exceed ten per cent of the
ex-works price of the product; or

(c)	for a product classified under chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the weight of all non- originating materials used in its production that have not undergone the required change in tariff classification does not exceed seven per cent of the total weight of the product; and

provided that the product meets all other applicable conditions for qualifying as an originating product set out in this Annex, including Article VII of this Annex.

2.	The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph 1 shall, however, be taken into account in calculating the value of non-originating materials used in the production of the product.


Article VII
Non-Qualifying Operations

1.	The following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to qualify a product as an originating product of a Party, whether or not the requirements of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article IV of this Annex are satisfied:

(a)	preserving operations to ensure that the product remains in good condition during transport and storage, such as drying, freezing, keeping in brine and other similar operations;

(b)	changes of packing and breaking-up and assembly of packages;

(c)	washing, cleaning and removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
 
(d)	simple painting and polishing operations;

(e)	sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;

(f)	sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading or matching, including the making-up of sets of articles;

(g)	simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases or boxes, simple fixing on cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations;

(h)	collection of parts and components classified as a product pursuant to Rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System;

(i)	affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;

(j)	simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds;

(k)	simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products into parts;

(l)	ironing or pressing of textiles;

(m)	husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of cereals and rice;

(n)	operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;

(o)	peeling, stoning and shelling of fruits, nuts and vegetables;

(p)	slaughter of animals; and

(q)	a combination of two or more operations referred to in subparagraphs (a) to (p).
 
2.	For the purposes of paragraph 1, all operations carried out in the customs territory of a Party on the product shall be taken into account together.

3.	For the purposes of this Article:

(a)	an operation is described as “simple” if neither special skills nor machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying it out are needed;

(b)	“simple mixing” means an operation of mixing which needs neither special skills nor machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying it out. However, simple mixing does not include chemical reaction. “Chemical reaction” means a process, including a biochemical process, which results in a molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new intramolecular bonds, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule; and

(c)	“simple assembly” means an operation of assembling parts of articles without special skills, machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying it out. Such operation does not include testing or inspection.


Article  VIII Unit of Qualification

1.	In applying the provisions of this Annex, the unit of qualification shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification under the Harmonized System. Accordingly, it follows that:

(a)	when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under a single tariff line, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification; and
 
(b)	when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under a single tariff line, each product shall be taken individually into account in determining whether it qualifies as an originating product of a Party.

2.	With respect to packaging materials and containers that are used for retail sale of a product:

(a)	in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the production of the product have undergone the applicable change in tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or processing operation set out in Appendix 1 to this Annex, packaging materials and containers for retail sale, which are classified with the product pursuant to Rule 5 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, shall be disregarded; and

(b)	in calculating the value of non-originating materials used in the production of the product, packaging materials and containers that are used for retail sale shall be considered as materials of the product.

3.	Packing materials and containers for shipment that are used to protect a product during transportation shall be disregarded in determining whether the product qualifies as an originating product of a Party.


Article IX
Unassembled or Disassembled Product

1.	Where a product satisfies the requirements of the relevant provisions of Articles II to VIII of this Annex and is imported into the customs territory of a Party from the customs territory of the other Party in an unassembled or disassembled form but is classified as an assembled product pursuant to Rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, such product shall be considered as an originating product of the other Party.
 
2.	A product assembled in the customs territory of a Party from unassembled or disassembled materials, which were imported into the customs territory of the Party and classified as an assembled product pursuant to Rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the interpretation of the Harmonized System, shall be considered as an originating product of the Party, provided that it would have satisfied the applicable requirements of the relevant provisions of Articles II to VIII of this Annex if each of the non-originating materials among the unassembled or disassembled materials had been imported into the customs territory of the Party separately and not in an unassembled or disassembled form.


Article  X Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1.	In determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the production of a product have undergone the applicable change in tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or processing operation set out in Appendix 1 to this Annex, accessories, spare parts or tools delivered with the product and that form part of its standard accessories, spare parts or tools, shall be disregarded, provided that:

(a)	the accessories, spare parts or tools are not invoiced separately from the product, whether or not they are separately described in the invoice; and

(b)	the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts or tools are customary for the product.

2.	In calculating the value of non-originating materials used in the production of a product, accessories, spare parts or tools shall be considered as materials of the product.
 
Article XI Neutral Elements

In order to determine whether a product qualifies as an originating product of a Party, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following elements used in its production:

(a)	fuel and energy;

(b)	plant and equipment;

(c)	machines, tools, dies and moulds; and

(d)	any other materials that are not physically incorporated or which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.


Article XII Accounting Segregation

1.	Where identical and interchangeable originating and non- originating products are used as materials in the production of another product, those products shall be physically segregated during storage.

2.	For the purposes of this Article, “identical and interchangeable originating and non-originating products” means originating products of a Party and non-originating products used as materials being of the same kind and commercial quality, having the same technical and physical characteristics, and which, once they are incorporated into another product, cannot be distinguished from one another for origin purposes by virtue of any markings or other means.

3.	A producer having considerable costs or technical difficulties in keeping separate stocks of identical and interchangeable originating and non-originating products used in the production of a product may use the so-called “accounting segregation” method for managing stocks.
 
4.	The “accounting segregation” method shall be recorded, applied and maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the customs territory of the Party in which the product is produced. The method chosen shall:

(a)	permit a clear distinction to be made between originating and non-originating products acquired or kept in stock; and

(b)	guarantee that no more products receive qualification as originating products of a Party than would be the case if the identical and interchangeable originating and non-originating products used as materials had been physically segregated.

5.	A Party may require that the application of the method for managing stocks as provided for in this Article be subject to prior authorisation.
 
Section 3 Territorial Requirements


Article XIII Principle of Territoriality

1.	Except as provided for in paragraph 1 of Article V of this Annex, the conditions for qualification as an originating product of a Party set out in Section 2 shall be fulfilled in the customs territory of the Party without interruption.

2.	Where originating products of a Party exported from the customs territory of a Party to a non-Party return to the customs territory of the Party, they shall be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent governmental authority of the Party that:

(a)	the returning products are the same as those exported; and

(b)	the returning products have not undergone any operation other than splitting up of the consignment, and unloading, reloading and any other operation designed to preserve them in good condition while being outside the customs territory of the Party.


Article XIV Consignment Criteria

1.	An originating product of a Party shall be deemed to meet the consignment criteria when it is:

(a)	transported directly from the customs territory of the exporting Party; or
 
(b)	transported through one or more non-Parties for the purpose of transit or temporary storage in warehouses, provided that it does not undergo operations other than splitting up of the consignment, and unloading, reloading and any other operation designed to
preserve it in good condition.

2.	Notwithstanding Article II of this Annex, if an originating product of a Party does not meet the consignment criteria referred to in paragraph 1, it shall not be considered as an originating product of the Party.
 
Section 4 Certification of Origin


Article XV Proof of Origin

For the purposes of this Annex, the following documents shall be considered as proofs of origin:

(a)	a Certificate of Origin referred to in Article XVI of this Annex; and

(b)	an origin declaration referred to in Article XIX of this Annex.


Article XVI Certificate of Origin

1.	A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.

2.	For the purposes of this Article, the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party may designate, under the authorisation given in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of that Party, other entities or bodies for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin.

3.	Each Party shall establish its form for the Certificate of Origin, which shall conform to the specimen provided in Appendix 2 to this Annex. The Certificate of Origin shall be completed in English by the exporter or his authorised representative in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party.
 
4.	The exporting Party shall ensure that the exporter applying for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin for a product is prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees which issue the Certificate of Origin, all appropriate documents proving that the product qualifies as an originating product of a Party.

5.	Where the exporter of a product is not the producer of the product in the customs territory of the exporting Party, the exporter may request a Certificate of Origin in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party on the basis of:

(a)	a declaration given by the exporter to the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees based on the information provided by the producer of the product;

(b)	a declaration voluntarily given by the producer of the product directly to the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees at the request of the exporter; or

(c)	a declaration given to the exporter by another person, as provided for in the applicable laws and
regulations of the exporting Party.

6.	A Certificate of Origin for a product shall be issued by the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees if the product can be considered as an originating product of a Party.

7.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees shall take any steps necessary to verify the qualification of the products as originating products of a Party. They shall also ensure that the form referred to in paragraph 3 is duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
 
8.	The exporting Party shall ensure that the exporter to whom a Certificate of Origin for a product has been issued, or the producer referred to in subparagraph 5(b), notifies in writing the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees without delay when such exporter or producer knows that the product does not qualify as an originating product of the Party indicated in the Certificate of Origin.

9.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees shall, if they receive notification in accordance with paragraph 8 or if they learn, after the issuance of the Certificate of Origin, that the product does not qualify as an originating product of the Party indicated
in the Certificate of Origin, cancel the Certificate of Origin, and promptly notify the cancellation to the exporter to whom the Certificate of Origin has been issued and to the customs authority of the importing Party, except where the Certificate of Origin has been returned to the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees without
being used.


Article XVII
Certificate of Origin Issued Retrospectively

1.	A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the time of shipment, except as provided for in paragraph 2.

2.	In exceptional cases where the Certificate of Origin has not been issued by the time of shipment, the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees shall, at the request of the exporter, issue a Certificate of Origin retrospectively in accordance with paragraph 6 of Article XVI of this Annex. Such Certificate of Origin shall bear the phrase “ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY” in field 7.
 
Article XVIII
Issuance of a Duplicate Certificate of Origin

In the event of theft, loss or destruction of an issued Certificate of Origin before the expiration of its validity, the exporter may request the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees to issue a new Certificate of Origin as a duplicate of the original Certificate of Origin on the basis of the documents in their possession. The Certificate of Origin issued in this way may bear the word “DUPLICATE” in field 7. The date of issuance of the original Certificate of Origin shall be indicated in the new Certificate of Origin. The new Certificate of Origin shall be valid during the term of the validity of the original Certificate of Origin.


Article XIX Origin Declaration

1.	An origin declaration referred to in paragraph (b) of Article XV of this Annex may be produced, in accordance with this Article, only by an approved exporter provided for in paragraph 2.

2.	The competent governmental authority of a Party may authorise an exporter in the customs territory of that Party to produce an origin declaration as an approved exporter, on condition that:

(a)	the exporter makes frequent shipments of originating products of a Party;

(b)	the exporter fulfils the conditions set out in the laws and regulations of the exporting Party; and

(c)	the exporter gives the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party a written undertaking that he or she accepts full responsibility for any origin declaration which identifies him or her as if it had been signed in manuscript by him or her.
 
3.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party shall allocate to the approved exporter an authorisation number which shall appear on the origin declaration. The origin declaration does not have to be signed by the approved exporter.

4.	An origin declaration may be produced only if the product concerned can be considered as an originating product of a Party.

5.	Where the approved exporter is not the producer of the product in the customs territory of the exporting Party, an origin declaration for the product may be produced by the approved exporter in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party on the basis of:

(a)	information provided by the producer of the product to the approved exporter;

(b)	a declaration, given by the producer of the product to the approved exporter, that the product qualifies as an originating product of a Party; or

(c)	a declaration given to the approved exporter by another person, as provided for in the applicable laws and regulations of the exporting Party.

6.	An approved exporter shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party, all appropriate documents proving that the product for which the origin declaration was produced qualifies as an originating product of the Party indicated in the origin declaration.
 
7.	The text of an origin declaration shall be as provided for in Appendix 3 to this Annex. An origin declaration shall be produced in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party by an approved exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the product concerned in sufficient detail to enable it to be identified. The origin declaration shall be considered to be produced on the date of the issuance of such commercial document.

8.	An origin declaration for a product may be produced by the approved exporter at the time of or after the exportation of the product.

9.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party may verify the proper use of the authorisation as an approved exporter. The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party may withdraw the authorisation at any time. It shall do so in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party where the approved exporter no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes improper use of the authorisation.

10.	Each Party shall ensure that the approved exporter, which its competent governmental authority has authorised, who has produced the origin declaration for a product notifies in writing the competent governmental authority without delay when such approved exporter learns that the product does not qualify as an originating	product of the Party indicated in the origin declaration.

11.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party shall, when it receives notification in accordance with paragraph 10, promptly notify the fact to the customs authority of the importing Party.
 
Article  XX Validity of Proof of Origin

1.	A proof of origin shall be valid for twelve months from the date on which it is issued or produced, and shall be submitted for single importation within such period to the customs authority of the importing Party.

2.	Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authority of the importing Party after the final date for submission specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted when failure to observe the time-limit is due to force majeure or other valid causes beyond the control of the exporter or importer.


Article XXI
Claim for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1.	The importing Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment in accordance with this Agreement to an originating product of the importing Party or the exporting Party, imported from the customs territory of the exporting Party, on the basis of the proof of origin submitted by the importer who claims preferential tariff treatment in accordance with the procedures applicable in the customs territory of the importing Party.

2.	Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the importing Party may waive the requirement for a proof of origin in accordance with its laws and regulations.

3.	Where an originating product of a Party is imported through one or more non-Parties, the importing Party may require importers who claim preferential tariff treatment for that product to submit:

(a)	a copy of through bill of lading; or
 
(b)	a certificate or any other information given by the customs authority of such non-Parties or other relevant entities, which evidences that the product has not undergone operations other than splitting up of the consignment, and unloading, reloading and any other operation designed to preserve it in good condition in those non-Parties.

4.	The customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to a product for which an importer claims preferential tariff treatment where such product is not considered as an originating product of the importing or the exporting Party or where the importer fails to comply with any of the relevant requirements of this Annex.


Article XXII Supporting Documents

The documents referred to in paragraph 4 of Article XVI of this Annex and paragraph 6 of Article XIX of this Annex used for the purposes of proving that the product covered by a proof of origin qualifies as an originating product of a Party may consist of inter alia the following:

(a)	direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or producer to obtain the products concerned, contained for example in his or her transaction documents;

(b)	documents proving that the materials used in the production of the product qualify as originating products of a Party, issued or produced in the customs territory of a Party where these documents are used, as provided for in its laws and regulations;

(c)	documents proving the working or processing of materials in the customs territory of a Party, issued or produced in the customs territory of a Party where these documents are used, as provided for in its laws and regulations; or
 
(d)	proof of origin proving that the materials used in the production of the product qualify as originating products of a Party, issued or produced in the customs territory of a Party.


Article XXIII Preservation of Documents and Records

1.	The exporter to whom a Certificate of Origin was issued shall keep the documents referred to in paragraph 4 of Article XVI of this Annex for at least three years after the date on which the Certificate of Origin was issued.

2.	The approved exporter who has produced an origin declaration shall keep a copy of the commercial document on which the origin declaration was produced as well as the documents referred to in paragraph 6 of Article XIX of this Annex for at least three years after the date on which the origin declaration has been produced.

3.	The producer of a product referred to in subparagraph 5(b) of Article XVI of this Annex and the person referred to in subparagraph 5(c) of Article XVI of this Annex shall keep the records relating to the origin of the product for at least three years after the date on which the Certificate of Origin was issued or after the date on which the declaration referred to in subparagraph 5(c) of Article XVI of this Annex was given by the person to the exporter, as specified in the laws and regulations of the exporting Party.

4.	The producer of a product referred to in subparagraph 5(b) of Article XIX of this Annex and the person referred to in subparagraph 5(c) of Article XIX of this Annex shall keep the records relating to the origin of the product for at least three years, or a longer period where it is specified in the laws and regulations of the exporting Party, after the date on which the declaration referred to in subparagraphs 5(b) or 5(c) of Article XIX of this Annex was given by the producer or person to the approved exporter, as specified in the laws and regulations of the exporting Party.
 
5.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party or its designees which has issued a Certificate of Origin shall keep a record of that Certificate of Origin for at least three years after the date on which the Certificate of Origin was issued.
 
Section 5
Arrangements for Administrative Cooperation


Article XXIV Notifications

1.	Each Party shall provide the other Party with:

(a)	the form of its Certificate of Origin;

(b)	the design feature of impressions of stamps used by the competent governmental authority or its designees for the issuance of Certificates of Origin; and

(c)	a sample of impressions provided for in subparagraph (b).

2.	Where the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party designates other entities or bodies to carry out the issuance of Certificate of Origin, the exporting Party shall notify in writing the other Party of its designees.

3.	The competent governmental authority of a Party shall provide the other Party with information on the composition of the authorisation number for approved exporters, where established by the Party.


Article XXV Verification of Proofs of Origin

1.	In order to ensure the proper application of this Annex, the Parties shall assist each other to carry out verification of the proof of origin and the correctness of the information given therein, in accordance with this Agreement and their respective laws and regulations.

2.	Upon request of the customs authority of the importing Party, the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party shall carry out the verifications referred to in paragraph 1.
 
3.	For the purpose of the verification, the customs authority of the importing Party shall return the proof of origin, or a copy thereof, to the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party, as the case may be, giving the reasons for the request for the verification. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given in the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded to the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party in support of such request.

4.	For the purpose of the verification, the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party shall take any necessary measures to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the documents or premises of the exporter, or the producer or the person referred to in Articles XVI and XIX of this Annex, and any other inspection considered appropriate.

5.	The customs authority of the importing Party may suspend the granting of preferential tariff treatment to the products covered by the proof of origin concerned while awaiting the results of the verification. However, it shall not wait for the verification to be completed before it releases the product to the importer, in accordance with its laws and regulations, unless the product is subject to appropriate administrative measures.

6.	The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party shall inform the customs authority of the importing Party of the results of the verification as soon as possible. The results shall indicate clearly whether the proof of origin is authentic and whether the product concerned qualifies as an originating product of the Party indicated in the proof of origin.
 
7.	If there is no reply from the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party within ten months of the date of the request for the verification or within any other time period agreed upon by the Parties, or if the reply does not contain sufficient information for determining the authenticity of the proof of origin concerned or the qualification of the product as an originating product of the Party indicated in the proof of origin, the customs authority of the importing Party shall be entitled to refuse to grant preferential tariff treatment.

8.	Upon written request of the importing Party and subject to any conditions set out by the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party, customs officials of the importing Party may be present as observers during the verification conducted by the competent governmental authority of the exporting Party. If the exporting Party refuses such presence of customs officials, the importing Party shall be entitled to consider the product covered by the proof of origin as non- originating.


Article XXVI Confidentiality

1.	Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its laws and regulations, the confidentiality of information provided to it as confidential pursuant to this Annex, and shall protect that information from disclosure.

2.	Information obtained by the customs authority of the importing Party pursuant to this Annex:

(a)	may only be used by such authority for the purposes of this Annex; and

(b)	shall not be used by the importing Party in any criminal proceedings carried out by a court or a judge, unless such information is requested by and provided to the importing Party through the diplomatic channels or other channels established in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the exporting Party.
 


Article XXVII
Penalties and Measures against Fraudulent Acts

Each Party shall establish or maintain, in accordance with its laws and regulations, appropriate penalties, sanctions, or other measures against its exporters, and the producers and persons referred to in Articles XVI and XIX of this Annex who have committed fraudulent acts in connection with a proof of origin.


Article XXVIII Operational Procedures

Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall adopt Operational Procedures that provide detailed regulations pursuant to which the customs authorities, the competent governmental authorities and other relevant authorities of the Parties shall implement their functions under this Annex.


Article XXIX Miscellaneous

1.	Communications between the importing Party and the exporting Party shall be conducted in the English language.

2.	For the purposes of determining the origin in accordance with Section 2, the generally accepted accounting principles in the customs territory of the exporting Party shall be applied.
 
Section 6 Final Provisions


Article XXX
Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation

1.	For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of Chapter 3 and this Annex, the Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation (hereinafter referred to in this Article as “the Sub- Committee”) is hereby established.

2.	The functions of the Sub-Committee shall be:

(a)	reviewing, monitoring and, as necessary, making appropriate recommendations to the Joint Committee on:

(i)	the implementation and operation of Chapter 3 and this Annex;

(ii)	any amendments to Appendices 1 to 3 to this Annex; and

(iii)	the Operational Procedures referred to in Article XXVIII of this Annex;

(b)	considering any other matter related to Chapter 3 and this Annex as the Parties may agree;

(c)	reporting its findings to the Joint Committee; and

(d)	carrying out other tasks assigned by the Joint Committee.

3.	The Sub-Committee shall meet at such time and venue as may be agreed by the Parties.
 
4.	The Sub-Committee shall be composed of representatives of the Parties.


Article XXXI
Transitional Provisions for Products in Transit or Storage

The provisions of this Agreement may be applied to products which comply with the provisions of this Annex, and which on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, are either in transit from the customs territory of the exporting Party to the customs territory of the importing Party or in temporary storage in a bonded warehouse under customs control. Such application shall be subject to the submission to the customs authority of the importing Party, within four months of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, of a Certificate of Origin issued retrospectively or an origin declaration and, if required pursuant to Article XXI of this Annex, such other documentation relating to the importation of the product.
 
Appendix 1 Product Specific Rules

Introductory Notes
1.	For the purposes of the product specific rules set out in this Appendix:

(a)	(i)	“VNM” denotes the maximum value, in percentage of the ex-works price of the product as indicated by the figure immediately after it, of	non-originating materials used in the production of the product. For example, “VNM 40%” denotes that the VNM does not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price of the product.

(ii)	“CC” denotes a change to the chapter, heading or subheading from any other chapter.	This means that all non- originating materials used in the production of the product have undergone a change in tariff classification at the
two-digit level (i.e. a change in chapter) of the HS;

(iii)	“CTH” denotes a change to the chapter, heading or subheading from any other heading.	This means that all non- originating materials used in the production of the product have undergone a change in tariff classification at the four-digit level (i.e. a change in heading) of the HS;

(iv)	“CTSH” denotes a change to the chapter, heading or subheading from any other subheading.	This means that all non- originating materials used in the production of the product have undergone a change in tariff classification at the
six-digit level (i.e. a change in subheading) of the HS; and

(v)	“WO” means that the product is wholly obtained in the customs territory of a Party as defined in Article III of Annex II;
 
(b)	In determining the origin of a product classified under chapters 61 to 63, materials used in the production of the product which are not classified under chapters 50 to 63 shall be disregarded, whether or not they contain textiles.

2.	This Appendix is based on the Harmonized System as amended on 1 January 2007.





Chapter of the HS	Tariff classi- fication number	Product specific rules

(Note: Products which satisfy the applicable rules set out in field
(3) or (4) below shall be considered as originating products of a Party.)
(1)	(2)	(3) or (4)
Chapter 1

Live animals	01	CC	
Chapter 2

Meat and edible meat offal	02	CC except from chapter 1.	
Chapter 3

Fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates	03	CC	
Chapter 4

Dairy produce; birds' eggs; natural honey; edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included	04	CC	
Chapter 5

Products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included	05	CC	
Chapter 6	06	CC	
Live trees and other	except		
plants; bulbs, roots and the like; cut flowers and	for:		
ornamental foliage	06.02	CC and VNM 50%	
 
Chapter 7

Edible vegetables and certain roots and tubers	07	CC	
Chapter 8

Edible fruit and nuts; peel of citrus fruits or melons	08	CC	
Chapter 9

Coffee, tea, maté and spices	09

except for:

0901.21 -
0901.90	CC



CTSH	
Chapter 10

Cereals	10	CC	
Chapter 11	11	CC except from chapter 10.	
Products of the milling	except		
industry; malt; starches; inulin; wheat gluten	for:		
	11.05	CC except from chapter 7.	
	11.06	CC except from heading 07.08,	
		07.10, 07.13,	
		or 07.14 or	
		chapter 8.	
	1108.13 -	CC except from	
	1108.14	chapter 7.	
	1108.19 -	CC except from	
	1108.20	chapter 7 or
10.	
Chapter 12

Oil seeds and oleaginous fruits; miscellaneous grains, seeds and fruit; industrial or medicinal plants; straw and fodder	12	CC	
Chapter 13

Lac; gums, resins and other vegetable saps and extracts	13	CC	
 
Chapter 14

Vegetable plaiting materials; vegetable products not elsewhere specified or included	14	CC	
Chapter 15	15.01-
15.02	CC	
Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products;	
15.03	
CTH	
prepared edible fats; animal or vegetable waxes	15.04-
15.06	CC	
	15.07 - 15.08	CC except from chapter 12.	
	15.09 - 15.10	CC except from chapter 7.	
	1511.10 -	CC except from	
	1515.19	chapter 12.	
	1515.21 -	CC except from	
	1515.29	chapter 10.	
	1515.30 -	CC except from	
	1515.90	chapter 12.	
	1516.10	CC except from chapter 2 or 5.	
	1516.20	CC except from chapter 7, 8 or	
		12.	
	1517.10	CC except from chapter 2, 4, 5	
		or 12.	
	1517.90 -	CC except from	
	1520.00	chapter 2, 4,
5, 7, 8 or 12.	
	1521.10	CC except from chapter 7, 8 or	
		12.	
	1521.90 -	CC except from	
	1522.00	chapter 2, 4, 5
or 12.	
Chapter 16

Preparations of meat, of	16.01 - 16.02	CC except from chapter 1, 2 or
5.	
fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates	
16.03	
CC except from chapter 2, 3 or
5.	
 
	1604.11 -	CC except from	
	1604.20	chapter 3.	
	1604.30	CC and VNM 50%	
	16.05	CC except from chapter 3.	
Chapter 17	17.01	CC except from chapter 12.	
Sugars and sugar confectionery	
1702.11 -
1702.19	
CC except from chapter 4.	
	1702.20	CC	
	1702.30 -	CC except from	
	1702.90	chapter 11 or
12.	
	17.03	CC except from chapter 12.	
	1704.10	CTH and the maximum value	
		of the non-	
		originating	
		materials	
		classified	
		under chapter	
		17 used in the	
		production is	
		30% of the ex-	
		works price of	
		the product.	
	1704.90	CTH and the maximum value	
		of the non-	
		originating	
		materials	
		classified	
		under chapters	
		4 and 17 used	
		in the	
		production is	
		45% of the ex-	
		works price of	
		the product.	
Chapter 18	18	CTH	
Cocoa and cocoa	except		
preparations	for:		
	18.01	CC	
 
	18.06	CTH and the maximum value of the non- originating materials classified under chapters
4 and 17 used in the production is 45% of the ex- works price of the product.	
Chapter 19	19.01	CC except from chapter 10 or	
Preparations of cereals,		11.	
flour, starch or milk;			
pastrycooks' products			
	19.02	CC except from chapter 10	
		(except for	
		durum wheat) or	
		chapter 11	
		(except for	
		products	
		produced from	
		durum wheat).	
	19.03	CC except from chapter 10	
		(except for	
		heading 10.01)	
		or chapter 11	
		(except for	
		heading 11.01).	
	1904.10 -
1905.40	CTH and VNM 40%	
	1905.90	CC except from heading 11.05.	
Chapter 20	20	CC and VNM 60%	
Preparations of	except		
vegetables, fruit, nuts or other parts of plants	for:		
	2002.10	CC except from chapter 7.	
	2004.10	CC except from chapter 7.	
	2008.11	CC except from chapter 12.	
	2008.20 -	CC except from	
	2008.92	chapter 8.	
 
	2009.11 -	CC except from	
	2009.12	chapter 8.	
	2009.50	CC except from chapter 7.	
	2009.71 -	CC except from	
	2009.79	chapter 8.	
Chapter 21	21	CC	
Miscellaneous edible	except		
preparations	for:		
	2103.20	CC except from chapter 7 or	
		20.	
	21.05	CC except from chapter 4 or	
		19.	
	21.06	CC and VNM 45%	
Chapter 22	22.01	CC		
Beverages, spirits and vinegar	22.02	CTH and VNM 55%		
	22.03	CTH		
	22.04 -	CC except from		
	22.06	chapter 8 or
20.		
	22.07	CC		
	2208.20 -
2208.30	CTH except from heading 22.07.	VNM	60%
	2208.40 -	CTH except from		
	2208.60	heading 22.07.		
	2208.70	CTH except from heading 22.07.	VNM	60%
	2208.90			
	- Sake compound	CTH and VNM 60%		
	and			
	cooking			
	sake			
	(Mirin)			
 
	- Bever-	CC except from	
	ages with	chapter 8 or	
	a basis of fruits and	20.	
	fruit		
	juices, of		
	an		
	alcoholic		
	strength		
	by volume		
	of less		
	than one		
	per cent		
	- other	CTH except from heading 22.07.	
	22.09	CTH	
Chapter 23	23	CTH	
Residues and waste from	except		
the food industries; prepared animal fodder	for:		
	2301.10	CTH except from chapter 2 or 5.	
	2301.20	CTH except from chapter 3.	
	23.09	CTH and VNM 60%	
Chapter 24	24	CTH	
Tobacco and manufactured	except		
tobacco substitutes	for:		
	2401.10 -
2401.20	CC	
	2401.30	CTSH	
Chapter 25

Salt; sulphur; earths and stone; plastering materials, lime and cement	25.01	CC	
Chapter 28	2804.61 -
2804.69	CTSH	VNM 60%
Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of precious	
2844.10	
CC	
metals, of rare-earth metals, of radioactive elements or of isotopes	2844.20 -
2844.50	CTSH	
Chapter 29 Organic chemicals	29

except for:	CTSH	VNM 60%
 
	2905.44	CTH except from heading 17.02.	
	2906.11	CC except from chapter 33.	
	2918.14 -	CC except from	
	2918.15	chapter 17 or
23.	
	29.40	CTH except from heading 17.02.	
Chapter 30

Pharmaceutical products	3006.92	WO	
Chapter 31

Fertilisers	31	CTSH	VNM 60%
Chapter 32	32.04	CTH
Note: In applying this rule, a change in tariff classification at the four- digit level of the HS is not required for non- originating materials classified under heading
32.04 used in the production, provided that the total value of those non- originating materials does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product.	VNM 60%
Tanning or dyeing			
extracts; tannins and			
their derivatives; dyes,			
pigments and other			
colouring matter; paints			
and varnishes; putty and			
other mastics; inks			
 
Chapter 34	34.02	CTH
Note: In applying this rule, a change in tariff classification at the four- digit level of the HS is not required for non- originating materials classified under heading
34.02 used in the production, provided that the total value of those non- originating materials does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product.	VNM	60%
Soap, organic surface-				
active agents, washing				
preparations, lubricating				
preparations, artificial				
waxes, prepared waxes,				
polishing or scouring				
preparations, candles and				
similar articles,				
modelling pastes, "dental				
waxes" and dental				
preparations with a basis				
of plaster				
Chapter 35	35.01	CC	
Albuminoidal substances;	3502.11 -	CC except from	
modified starches; glues; enzymes	3502.19	chapter 4.	
	3502.20 -
35.04	CTH	
	35.05	CC except from chapter 11.	
Chapter 38	38.01	CTSH	VNM	60%
Miscellaneous chemical products	3805.90	CTSH	VNM	60%
	
38.06	
CTSH	
VNM	
60%
	3809.10	CTH except from chapter 11 or		
		35.		
	3824.60	CTH except from heading 17.02.		
Chapter 39	39.01 - 39.13	CTSH	VNM	60%
Plastics and articles				
thereof				
 
Chapter 40

Rubber and articles thereof	40.12	CTSH	VNM 60%
Chapter 41

Raw hides and skins (other than furskins) and leather	41	CC	
Chapter 42

Articles of leather; saddlery and harness; travel goods, handbags and similar containers; articles of animal gut (other than silk-worm gut)	42	CC	
Chapter 43

Furskins and artificial fur; manufactures thereof	43	CC	
Chapter 44

Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal	44.12	CTH except from heading 44.07
or 44.08.	VNM 60%
Chapter 46	46	CTH	
Manufactures of straw, of	except		
esparto or of other plaiting materials;	for:		
basketware and wickerwork	4601.29	CC except from chapter 14.	
	4601.94	CC except from chapter 14.	
	4602.19	CC except from chapter 14.	
Chapter 50	50	CTH	
Silk			
	except		
	for:		
	50.05	CTH except from heading 50.06.	
	50.06	CTH except from heading 50.05.	
 
Chapter 51	51	CTH	
Wool, fine or coarse	except		
animal hair; horsehair yarn and woven fabric	for:		
	51.04	CC	
	51.06 -	CTH outside	
	51.10	headings 51.06
- 51.10.	
	51.11 -	CTH outside	
	51.13	headings 51.11
- 51.13.	
Chapter 52	52	CTH	
Cotton	except for:		
	52.04 -	CTH outside	
	52.07	headings 52.04
- 52.07.	
	52.08 -	CTH outside	
	52.12	headings 52.08
- 52.12.	
Chapter 53	53	CTH	
Other vegetable textile	except		
fibres; paper yarn and woven fabrics of paper	for:		
yarn	53.03	CC	
	53.05	CC	
	53.06 -	CTH outside	
	53.08	headings 53.06
- 53.08.	
	53.09 -	CTH outside	
	53.11	headings 53.09
- 53.11.	
Chapter 54	54	CC	
Man-made filaments; strip	except		
and the like of man-made textile materials	for:		
	54.07 -	CTH outside	
	54.08	headings 54.07
- 54.08.	
Chapter 55

Man-made staple fibres	55

except for:	CC	
 
	55.08 -	CTH outside	
	55.11	headings 55.08
- 55.11.	
	55.12 -	CTH outside	
	55.16	headings 55.12
- 55.16.	
Chapter 56

Wadding, felt and nonwovens; special yarns; twine, cordage, ropes and cables and articles thereof	56	CC	
Chapter 57

Carpets and other textile floor coverings	57	CC	
Chapter 58

Special woven fabrics; tufted textile fabrics; lace; tapestries; trimmings; embroidery	58	CC	
Chapter 59	59	CC	
Impregnated, coated,	except		
covered or laminated textile fabrics; textile	for:		
articles of a kind suitable for industrial use	59.01	CC
except from heading 50.07,	
		51.11 - 51.13,	
		52.08 - 52.12,	
		53.09 - 53.11,	
		54.07 - 54.08	
		or	
		55.12 - 55.16.	
	59.03 - 59.09	CC
except from	
		heading 50.07,	
		51.11 - 51.13,	
		52.08 - 52.12,	
		53.09 - 53.11,	
		54.07 - 54.08	
		or	
		55.12 - 55.16.	
	59.11	CC
except from	
		heading 50.07,	
		51.11 - 51.13,	
		52.08 - 52.12,	
		53.09 - 53.11,	
		54.07 - 54.08	
		or	
		55.12 - 55.16.	
 
Chapter 60

Knitted or crocheted fabrics	60	CC	
Chapter 61	61	CC
except from	
Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted		chapter 60, provided that the product is both cut or	
		knit to shape,	
		and sewn or	
		otherwise	
		assembled in	
		the customs	
		territory of a	
		Party.	
Chapter 62	62	CC
except from	
Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or crocheted		heading 50.07,
51.11 - 51.13,
52.08 - 52.12,
53.07 - 53.11,	
		54.07 - 54.08,	
		55.12 - 55.16,	
		58.01 - 58.02,	
		59.03 or 59.06	
		- 59.07,	
		provided that	
		the product is	
		both cut, and	
		sewn or	
		otherwise	
		assembled in	
		the customs	
		territory of a	
		Party.	
Chapter 63	63	CC
except from	
Other made up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn textile articles; rags		heading 50.07,
51.11 - 51.13,
52.08 - 52.12,
53.09 - 53.11,
54.07 - 54.08,	
		55.12 - 55.16	
		or chapter 60,	
		provided that	
		the product is	
		both cut or	
		knit to shape,	
		and sewn or	
		otherwise	
		assembled in	
		the customs	
		territory of a	
		Party.	
	except		
	for:		
 
	63.09 - 63.10	WO	
Chapter 64

Footwear, gaiters and the like; parts of such articles	64	CC	
Chapter 65

Headgear and parts thereof	65

except for:

65.01 - 65.02	CTH



CC	
Chapter 70

Glass and glassware	7018.10

7018.90	CC

CC	
Chapter 71	71.06	CTH except from heading 71.08	VNM	60%
Natural or cultured		or 71.10; or		
pearls, precious or semi- precious stones, precious metals, metals clad with precious metal, and articles thereof; imitation jewellery; coin		Non-originating materials classified under heading 71.06, 71.08 or
71.10 are used		
		in the		
		production and		
		each of such		
		non-originating		
		materials		
		undergoes		
		either or both		
		of the		
		following		
		operations;		
		(1) electro-		
		lytic, thermal		
		or chemical		
		separation;		
		(2) alloying or		
		fusion with		
		each other or		
		with a base		
		metals.		
 
71.08	CTH except from heading 71.06
or 71.10; or	VNM	60%
	Non-originating materials classified under heading 71.06, 71.08 or
71.10 used in the production and each of such non- originating materials undergoes either or both of the following operations;
(1)	electro- lytic, thermal or chemical separation;
(2)	alloying or fusion with each other or with a base metals.		
71.10	CTH except from heading 71.06
or 71.08; or	VNM	60%
	Non-originating materials classified under heading 71.06, 71.08 or
71.10 are used in the production and each of the
non-originating materials undergoes either or both of the following operations;
(1)	electro- lytic, thermal or chemical separation;
(2)	alloying or fusion with each other or with base metals.		
71.13	CTH
except from heading 71.14 -
71.18.	VNM	60%

 
	71.14	CTH
except from	VNM	60%
		heading 71.13,		
		or 71.15 -		
		71.18.		
	71.15	CTH
except from	VNM	60%
		heading 71.13 -		
		71.14 or		
		71.16 - 71.18.		
	71.16	CTH
except from	VNM	60%
		heading 71.13 -		
		71.15 or 71.17		
		- 71.18 or		
		subheading		
		7101.22,		
		7102.39,		
		7103.91-		
		7103.99 or		
		7104.90.		
Chapter 72	7210.70	CTSH	VNM	60%
Iron and steel	7219.31 -
7219.90	CTSH	VNM	60%
	7225.50 -
7225.99	CTSH	VNM	60%
	7226.92 -
7226.99	CTSH	VNM	60%
 
Chapter 85	8523.51 -
8523.59	CTH except from heading 85.42.

CTH; or
Diffusion process

Note: For the purposes of rules for products classified under subheadings 8541.10 -
8541.60 or
8542.31 -
8542.39,
“diffusion process” means a process, in which semi- conductor is formed on a substrate by the selective introduction of an appropriate dopant.
CTH; or

Diffusion process

CTH except from heading 85.42.	VNM	60%
Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders	8541.10 –
8541.60		
VNM	
60%
and reproducers,				
television image and				
sound recorders and				
reproducers, and parts				
and accessories of such				
articles				
	







8542.31 –
8542.39		







VNM	







60%
	
8543.70 -
8543.90		
VNM	
60%
Chapter 91	91	CTH	VNM	40%
Clocks and watches and	except			
parts thereof	for:			
	9113.90	CC		
 
Chapter 94	9401.90	CC	
Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and	9404.21 -
9404.29	CC	
similar stuffed furnishings; lamps and	9404.90		
lighting fittings, not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name- plates and the like; prefabricated buildings	- Quilts and eiderdowns	CC except from heading 50.07,
51.11 - 51.13,
52.08 - 52.12,
53.09 - 53.11,
54.07 - 54.08	
		or	
		55.12 - 55.16.	
	- Others	CTH	
Chapter 96	96.01	CC	
Miscellaneous manufactured articles	96.05	CC	
 
Appendix 2
Specimen of Certificate of Origin






















(Note1)
If goods are not packed, indicate number
of articles or state
“in bulk” as appropriate.












(Note 2)
Complete only where the regulations of the exporting country require.
 


Appendix 3
Text of Origin Declaration

"The exporter of the products covered by this document (Authorisation No ... (Note 1)) declares that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of ... (Note
2) preferential origin."

Note 1:	The authorisation number of the approved exporter shall be entered in this space.

Note 2:	The origin of the products to be indicated.
